I think there's three blogposts here. One introducing the topic. A second is "how to measure" (with lots of individual examples of do's and don'ts). A third is "what to measure", a proposal for how SV's lessons apply to the news industry (with mockups for the kind of analytics software we need)

Your metrics suck
X ways news organizations can improve their metrics
How to use Google Analytics
Actionable metrics for the news industry


----------

A) 1. Are you measuring to find and solve problems?
B) 2. Do you measure the things that help you make money?
B) 3. Do metrics help you do your job?
C) 4. Can you separate signal from noise?
C) 5. Did you really find cause and effect?
C) 8. Are you tracking what you think you're tracking?
D) 6. Have you thought about the right level of detail?
D) 7. Each story is an individual product, each reporter her own team

A. Measure to find and solve problems. Pick metrics because they answer questions. Don't track just because you can.
B. Metrics are useful only insofar as they help you make money or do better journalism.
C. Avoid ambiguous metrics. Pick metrics where cause and effect is really clear, and metrics that don't produce too much statistical noise. Be precise.
D. Measure at the right granularity, don't just throw all your data together in a bunch of meaningless aggregates.


==> A bunch of smaller blogposts?

(Note: this is what I'm planning on right now, but I may decide at any point to cut a couple of posts out, or to publish them later, outside of the series, to give me more time to research or gain knowledge.)

THEORY

0. Your metrics suck
1. Hey, you're staring
2. In defense of pageviews
3. Your metrics don't tell you what you think they tell you
4. Averaged to death

TOOLS (I think I have to wait for this until I've had a couple of months of experience under my belt, without that, it's like the blind leading the blind)

5. Taming Google Analytics
6. KISSmetrics and Mixpanel for news organizations
7. Social media metrics
8. DIY metrics and raw data

WHAT'S MISSING

9. Squashing bugs
10. Rate me, rate yourself! Keep a report card and get better at what you do (self-evaluation + evaluation by readers)
11. What's missing, a.k.a. please build me this tool