Did you know Karl Marx was a journalist? European correspondent, in fact, for the New-York Tribune. Newspapers apparently used to have lots and lots of correspondents back in the 18th and 19th centuries – because they couldn't afford too many full-time journalists or because they didn't see the point, probably a little bit of both.

Demand for a job can wax and wane. Demand for reporters and editors and paginators has always fluctuated, and that's true for so many occupations.

One of my great-uncles was a tailor who, after WWII when the apparel industry moved from Europe and the States to sweatshops in third-world countries in search of lower labor costs, became a grocery boy and then a sweeper. It sucks, it absolutely wholeheartedly sucks, but sometimes that's what progress looks like. It looks like industries shrinking and people losing jobs.

We'll cover it up with a nice mellow speech about growing GDP or rising quality of life or a cute theory about how technology is the greatest job-creator there is. But that's only true if you don't look closely.

There's this interesting historical tidbit that comes to mind, from a piece by James Fallow a while back. He says "In the generation before mine, reporters had thought of themselves as kindred to policemen and factory workers" and it took half a century but eventually most of those blue collar reporters were replaced by college graduates. The great professionalization, a common thread throughout many industries in the 20th century.

You don't want to know how many doctors, before the 20th century, did not have a college degree. (Although I suppose at the time there wasn't that much medical science to learn anyway.)

Jobs can become harder or easier, more prestigious or less, move up the ladder from unskilled labor to high-paying specialty occupation... and sometimes back again.

I like this "quote from Shannon McFarland":http://shanmcf.com/2011/08/31/journalism-the-new-broadway/, a young journalist about my age: 

bq.. It’s funny. I’m hearing many people give similar advice to young journalists that I hear them give to the Broadway or Hollywood wannabe actors. “Don’t look down on part-time work that pays rent” or “It’s about who you know!”

Somewhere along the road, journalism went from an untrained, steady job to kin of the creative jobs your parents say are “unrealistic,” like being a painter or musician.

p. And some of you might have read "the story of Alexandra Kimball":http://www.randomhouse.ca/hazlitt/feature/how-succeed-journalism-when-you-cant-afford-internship, a talented aspiring journalist who was repeatedly told by editors that, yeah, even though she had a master's degree and some good clips, the best they could do for her was an unpaid internship.

Of my own college friends who are (or want to be) in journalism, one can't seem to find an internship, another one in the same predicament decided to focus on pursuing a PhD instead, one did an unpaid internship at a good newspaper and is freelancing now, and another is employed as a permalancer at a magazine. Oh, right, and then there's this one other guy who landed a job at a celebrity gossip magazine because they wanted to balance their male-female ratio and then with a combination of luck, charm and talent he managed to become editor in chief. (He has a big nose so I'm not jealous.) My successor as editor at the student newspaper went into banking.

Newspapering always had a certain glamour associated with it, but it's slowly becoming an industry where only the best and brightest are welcome – unless you want to work for a content farm.

Some of that is because there's more supply than demand, which allows editors to be picky about who they hire. If you're a journalist out looking for a job, be happy you didn't decide to become a press photographer, 'cause they have it way worse than you do. But another, often overlooked factor is that journalism has simply gotten a lot harder to do.

The writing and the reporting is still the same. But there's a ton of other skills people are asking for. Shooting video and recording podcasts, doing data analysis, mastering social media, tailoring prose to five different platforms, optimizing headlines and it'd be really nice if you could also write code and have an entrepreneurial streak.

Journalism used to require an army, now SWAT teams seem to work better. Extraordinarily talented people, but not a lot of them. Then you can do with five what used to require fifty.

So when newspapers are downsizing like crazy, part of that is quite simply because new economic realities are kicking them in the nuts, but another part of it is because 21st-century news organizations need to look very differently to thrive and organizations are making those changes.

The future is small teams of professional journalists to glue it all together (à la Tom Rosenstiel) and individuals from all over the world who write because they feel the need to, not because they get paid.

The future is in cheap, off-the-shelf technology that will replace big IT and ad departments.

Layoffs can be a sign of an industry in decay, like the auto industry in Europe and the US, but not always. And in the news industry, it's not. It's a sign of reinvention.

Smart people have been saying for a long, long time that we should try to save journalism, not newspapers. But for most people, the message has yet to sink in.