[The crux here, it seems to me, is that writing is at once at the core of journalism and an inconsequential "implementation detail." This duality makes it hard for journalists to decide whether to stick to their guns or whether to change the way they do things. Phrasing of this piece needs work, but it's an interesting point.]

Time and place

A while back, I was thinking about the best way to get a group of likeminded people together, to talk or think about something, or to create a community where before there was none. There's actually a surprising amount of options. Create a meetup group. Organize a conference. Start a mailing list. Start a newsletter. Or a site. Organize regular twitter chats. Open an IRC channel. Establish a blogging carnival, or a more fast-paced advent calendar.

There are many ways to get and keep people together and to further common goals or exchange information or brainstorm. They each have advantages and disadvantages. Newsletters and sites require an indefinite commitment, while advent calendars don't. Meetup groups require people to be in close geographical proximity, which mailing lists don't require. IRC allows for intense, focused communication on a single topic. Twitter is more superficial but supports many different lines of thought at the same time. Conferences require a substantial investment of time and money from their organizers, but can be powerfully intense. Message boards allow for distributed responsibilities.

Journalists are discovering the same is true for what they do. You can liveblog, do a quick news update, write a long-form article, do a series, go for a more interactive or data-driven approach or instead focus on anecdotes, on the story. Video, text, audio, database.

Increasingly, the question is becoming: well, why a story, why not something entirely different? I mean, the point is keeping the powerful to account and creating healthy communities, right? I had this conversion a while back with Scott Klein, and I remarked that

> That said, I worry that even the very best digital journos still unduly take for granted that the best way to achieve whichever goal it is you want a piece of journalism to achieve, is through a feature that will run as a part of the regular news cycle. I don't think that's good enough anymore. (Though to clarify I will add that I don't believe news updates as they exist now will ever go away either. They're a very efficient form of transmitting knowledge. Ditto for narrative in general. Good but not enough. We need more.)

> I would like more people to think like Joy Mayer: think about why to focus on a certain topic in the first place – no talk of "news sense" allowed – and once we've figured that out, figure out the people we need to reach, and then, how to get their attention, and then, whether that's really the most efficient thing we can do and whether it's the best use of our time. No nonsense like "if they don't read it, that's up to them" or "we wrote a piece, we tried." And I think if we started asking ourselves those questions on a daily basis, we would start doing very different things and some of those things might not look like news apps or frankly not like journalism at all.

> Granted, there's a very good reason journalism can't fill everyone's information needs all the time. It's a division of labor issue. We're trying to make the world a better place through journalism, and other people are trying to make the world a better place through other means, and we all best just stick to what we're good at if we ever want to accomplish anything. News apps teams are good at news apps and the courts reporter is good at courts reporting and we need both, together with so many other things. The generalist who can be everything to everyone doesn't exist. I get that. But division of labor doesn't absolve us from asking whether what we're doing is relevant and has impact.

So there's your million-dollar question: to what extent do we have to accept journalism the way it is, do what we do best and try to fit in with the many other services that provide people with much-needed information and entertainment... and to what extent do we need to recognize that the way we currently do journalism is just form, just a manifestation, not the essence?

We hear all this talk about how makers of buggies in the early 20th century needed to realize that they were in the transportation business, not the buggy business. That newspapers should realize they're not in the printing business but in the information business. But should a winemaker, faced with lessened demand, start brewing beer instead, or, more different still, create a dance club – because it's not about drink but about helping people have a good time?

If people remain unconvinced that journalism needs to change, don't assume it's because they're stupid. Maybe they're just drawing a line: here's what I do, and though it may not be as valuable as it used to be, it's who I am, what I am. Some adaptation, some reconciliation.