There is one simple reason that explains why newsmedia are having such a tough time: imploding advertising revenue. It truly is the single biggest reason why our industry is in decline, and it's a force that is outside of our immediate control. But if there's one big reason we're doing down, there are twenty different reasons that are preventing us from crawling back to our feet and thriving, even when opportunities abound.

One is mismanagement, but a more significant one is _mismatched_ management. We have very good people in charge, it's just that they're no longer good at the things this economy needs them to be good at.

So, yes, a word about mismanagement first.



The reason that mismanagement is so often not spotted is because it is of limited import. In many companies, it's annoying but it does limited damage and it's hard to quantify lost profits, and perhaps not the most important thing to worry about when you're making double-digit profits anyway.

As I noted in a comment to Jonathan Krim on my blog a while back, many an industry is full of mediocre companies and nevertheless does just fine. Indeed, capitalism is hardly so mercenary and industries where only the very best thrive are rare – the music industry is the only one that comes to mind. Conversely, nobody's happy with their wireless provider but those providers have no problem staying in business.

When we're talking about mismanagement, that's actually a symptom of a bigger problem, because it means something is affecting our industry in such a way that mismanagement is no longer a trifle but is suddenly becoming a real problem.

I don't doubt for a second that some newspaper companies are going to die because they're mismanaged. But I actually think most companies and most people working for those companies deserve more credit than that. It's not mismanagement, it's just that the management we have is no longer the management we need. Efficient but no longer effective.

news organizations are staffed by administrators: people who are really good at keeping things going, but not that good at figuring out new, cheaper and better ways to do things. Don't imagine these people to be dullards either: they're good at negotiating contracts, keeping the budget under control and putting out fires. They were and are smart enough to balance what readers want with a sense of civic duty and pride in good journalism, despite what critics may say. The highest-ranking administrators can pull off complicated endeavors like the mergers and acquisitions so common in the 20th century from the 70s onwards. But administrators are not creative and they're not paid to be creative. They were not hired to be bold, they were hired to be the exact opposite of bold: steady, intelligent, dependable.

People can have many talents, but most of us are better at some things and worse at others. Creative types are not often diligent administrators. It is often remarked that startups require a different kind of executive than established companies. Likewise, stable industries require a different kind of manager than an industry in flux. In a stable industry, it makes sense to hire administrators and eschew entrepreneurs.

(Likewise, in a stable industry, it does not make sense to favor multitalented reporters who can shoot video and organize events over those whose only talent is that they're able to turn in a good story. You'd have to pay more and you'd get nothing in return.)

Of course, then suddenly your biggest revenue stream goes to shit while your second-biggest revenue stream has (for many papers) been in decline for over a decade, and then you realize your company is staffed with very loyal and talented people that have pushed your company to unseen heights, the very drivers of your success... and they're suddenly useless.

So we're not innovating at the pace that we should be. There's maybe five news websites on the entire face of the earth that don't make me puke, and it's not just the design but the fact that they do nothing to encourage exploration, provide no context, have awful search engines and are infested with low-quality ads.



Not realizing that the best way to run a company is dependent on the environment you're in, not seeing the difference between mismanagement and mismatched management, can lead to big problems. It's why the New York Times Company, in need of a new CEO, will more than likely hire the wrong person. They'll hire someone who has a very successful career behind  her, an intelligent, insightful person with all the credentials you desire and a strong network, someone who never makes a mistake. But will it be an entrepreneur?

---

(and why administrators are a good thing in stable industries, even stable industries in need of innovation)

"big boy syndrome" as the modus operandi of administrators: do what everyone else is doing, follow trends, 

---

[don't know if this belongs here, in my "overview of everything that went wrong" or in my "waar mediamensen over babbelen", or in more than one of these; it may be interesting to point out why mismanagement didn't used to be so big of a deal yet now it is, but the main point is that stable industries require administrators rather than entrepreneurs and different stages of a company require different management styles, which explains why very *succesful* managers, not "mismanagers", are now driving the industry into the ground.]

why mismanagement has only recently become a problem. As Warren Buffett says, companies that provide essential (not just nice-to-have) services without any good substitute can 

"regularly price its product or service aggressively and thereby to earn high rates of return on capital. Moreover, franchises can tolerate mis-management. Inept managers may diminish a franchise’s profitability, but they cannot inflict mortal damage." (Feb. 28, 1992, letter to Berkshire Hathaway stockholders http://www.berkshirehathaway.com/letters/1991.html; h/t Jack Shafer: http://blogs.reuters.com/jackshafer/2012/05/18/so-warren-buffett-likes-newspapers-again/)

Newspapers used to be pretty much the only information source people had access to, except for a drip feed from TV newscasts, and it also used to be a uniquely easy way to access lots of readers, interesting to both advertisers, people selling or buying stuff, and for governments to communicate important public service announcements. In 1985 he said: "But even a poor newspaper is a bargain to most citizens simply because of its “bulletin board” value."

Surprisingly, Buffet had already outlined how that value (from purely an investor point of view) was slowly being eroded in his letter to stockholders the year before: http://www.berkshirehathaway.com/letters/1990.html