the impossibility of innovation w/ existing cost structures and staffing: many excellent opportunities for monetizing news are simply not available to most legacy news ops, or not appealing, even though they are available for startups and even potentially very profitable / why certain cost structures or size can be necessary to take advantage of certain opportunities, but makes it impossible to take advantage of others... though sometimes it's just about inefficiency and about perenially being efficient according to yesterday's standards.

We don't provide as much value as we used to do when newspapers had an information monopoly, so we can't extract as much value from our customers either. Being a big company makes us vulnerable to competition that can take advantage of cheap digital tools and a small, efficient work force. Most importantly, the revenues a digital-first operation can realize are by their nature smaller those print and broadcast have offered us in the past.

Our current cost structure does not allow us to make money from digital revenue sources. Essentially, our profits per employee ratio is too small.

For example, we could try to crowdfund investigative journalism through Kickstarter. Provided that takes off and we do a campaign every five or six weeks, that might net us about $20,000 a year. For any young company, $20,000 would be a welcome addition to a diversified income stream. For SourceMedia Group, $20,000 is maybe just about large enough to appear on the radar, but it wouldn't be a huge win and it is not a substantial contribution to the bottom line of a company our size.

Same thing with e-books, organizing local events, newsletter sponsorships and journalism workshops: there's money in all of these, just like there's still money in online advertising, but it's not clear that even the full breadth of digital revenue sources will be enough to sustain a company of our size.

There's no divine law specifying that local media companies with over 400 employees can continue to be profitable into perpetuity if only they work hard and make smart decisions. Smart decisions may not be enough.

The assumption often seems to be that only if we create better digital products then those revenues can come in and replace dwindling revenues from print but that is simply not what is happening. There's only one organization in the entire US that has been able to replace print revenues with digital revenues dollar-for-dollar: Atlantic Media.

Again: digital, by its very essence, has lower profit margins and demands leaner organizations. John Paton, the much-lauded CEO of Digital First Media, has been talking about having to get used to "digital dimes" instead of "print dollars" for a long time now, though I don't know if even he fully understands the shift this will require of the newspapers he shepherds.