Are we part of a lost generation? People with great ideas, but nowhere to go with those ideas? Art, architecture and design came a long way in the 20th century because not only did ideas get transmitted at a breakneck pace, but because once transmitted, the artists and craftsmen were never very far removed from being able to put their thoughts to work: you're either the head of design, or you're in the design team. At most newspaper companies, there's three, four or five layers of management on top of that.

Matt Waite seems resolved that he won't be able to make a big splash anymore, the industry being what it is, so instead he's teaching the next generation – maybe they'll have it easier. At Automattic, Daniel Bachhuber gets to spend some time on Edit Flow, a truly transformative piece of software for student newspapers that want to embrace the open-source revolution, but aside from that, he's pretty much VIP customer support. Do you think all Brian Boyer cares about is making news apps, and has no broader vision about what newspapers need to do to survive? Because that's all he got to say at the Chicago Tribune – that dude with his troope of geeks in the basement. Greg Linch, for the longest time, was stuck in the daily grind of the web producer role at the Washington Post. Nobody over there much cares about his thoughts on how to measure our stories' impact. Matt Thompson got to put some of his thoughts around how to make news a more context-rich experience in action, as project leader of the StateImpact project at NPR, but I can't help but feel that there's so much further he wanted to take that. Jonathan Stray, thanks to the Knight Foundation, is making a fascinating data journalism tool, for investigating large document sets, but you might remember Jonathan from that big post he did last year about designing journalism to be used. Is he helping the AP transition into the kind of organization that could support an ecosystem like that? I don't think so. William Davis got to implement an innovative publishing system at the Bangor Daily News, but only in between his day-to-day duties as a web producer.

I've been able to help my news organization, The Gazette, see the value of undesign, and got to think about the future of advertising a little bit while I was there... but do I feel like I've made a meaningful impact? No.

If we don't get to experiment, if we don't get to put our thoughts to the test, and refine them, and throw away the bad ideas and let our experiments lead us to new avenues, then I fear that ten or twenty years from now, we'll realize that we let all that creativity go to waste, that we will have been the generation to have pushed digital journalism forward, but not the generation to have pushed journalism itself forward.