---
layout: post
language: en
title: --
summary: --
---

I was looking over the entries to the Mozilla-Knight digital journalism challenge, which asks people to think of an application that could impact the way digital journalism is done. And one thing that struck me is how about half of the entries mention machine learning or language analysis. And the way they mention it: vaguely, and in a way that not quite explains how exactly the process should work and how it'll do its magic. In many applications, it seems to fill the role of industrial superglue: it's what holds an otherwise mediocre application together. "My application proposes bundling comments by what they talk about, so people won't have to sift through tons of comments to read the ones that interest them. Difficult, time-intensive you say? Nah, we'll just get some language analysis going, et voila." In that way, it's very similar to "social" five to ten years ago: you took an okay-ish concept, added some crowdsourcing, folksonomies and social networking, and there was your wonderful Web 2.0 application. Similar to how AJAX used to be perceived as well: the term found its way into laymans lexicon and people started talking about how they'd make this beautiful, AJAXy web app, without really even knowing what it entailed, just that it'd be slick. "Real-time web" holds a chance to attain the same status in the not-too-faraway future.

The fact that machine learning is on people's minds, and that to a certain extent it _has_ become easy — Google just opened up its prediction API, taking care of all the fussy details for you, at least for a certain set of problems and provided you only need a certain accuracy — has me very excited. But it also has me worried, because it's thought of as a sort of magic pixie dust that'll make everything better, whereas in reality there's no substitute for good product design. You still have to make something people will want to use, and work out the details of how you'll make that app, not just fill in all the gaps with "ML will solve any difficulties we face". Because it won't.