(and why administrators are a good thing in stable industries, even stable industries in need of innovation)

news organizations are staffed by administrators: people who are really good at keeping things going, but not that good at figuring out new, cheaper and better ways to do things. (People are usually better at one or the other, so in a stable industry, it actually makes sense to pick administrators over entrepreneurs.) So we're not innovating at the pace that we should be. There's maybe five news websites on the entire face of the earth that don't make me puke, and it's not just the design but the fact that they do nothing to encourage exploration, provide no context, have awful search engines and are infested with low-quality ads.

---

"big boy syndrome" as the modus operandi of administrators: do what everyone else is doing, follow trends, 

---

[don't know if this belongs here, in my "overview of everything that went wrong" or in my "waar mediamensen over babbelen", or in more than one of these; it may be interesting to point out why mismanagement didn't used to be so big of a deal yet now it is, but the main point is that stable industries require administrators rather than entrepreneurs and different stages of a company require different management styles, which explains why very *succesful* managers, not "mismanagers", are now driving the industry into the ground.]

why mismanagement has only recently become a problem. As Warren Buffett says, companies that provide essential (not just nice-to-have) services without any good substitute can 

"regularly price its product or service aggressively and thereby to earn high rates of return on capital. Moreover, franchises can tolerate mis-management. Inept managers may diminish a franchise’s profitability, but they cannot inflict mortal damage." (Feb. 28, 1992, letter to Berkshire Hathaway stockholders http://www.berkshirehathaway.com/letters/1991.html; h/t Jack Shafer: http://blogs.reuters.com/jackshafer/2012/05/18/so-warren-buffett-likes-newspapers-again/)

Newspapers used to be pretty much the only information source people had access to, except for a drip feed from TV newscasts, and it also used to be a uniquely easy way to access lots of readers, interesting to both advertisers, people selling or buying stuff, and for governments to communicate important public service announcements. In 1985 he said: "But even a poor newspaper is a bargain to most citizens simply because of its “bulletin board” value."

Surprisingly, Buffet had already outlined how that value (from purely an investor point of view) was slowly being eroded in his letter to stockholders the year before: http://www.berkshirehathaway.com/letters/1990.html