* KK doesn't get Schwartz' point about the paradox of choice, and in that he is very American. More choice is *not* always a good thing because it leads us to spend cognitive energy on choices that are sometimes unimportant, such as the type of jeans we want, or which of the five or ten possible career choices are right for us. KK is correct that more choice has meant that people now have more ways to find their precise talents and passions, but on the other hand I disagree that every new technology or game or invention or profession is just waiting for the person with which it'll perfectly gel. People appreciate certain things due to their nature, but also due to exposure. Do something enough and you'll learn to appreciate all the finesse behind it and the different ways you can use your creativity to advance. I feel very firmly that I could have been happy as a biologist, a computer scientist, a journalist, a teacher or an electrical engineer. I wouldn't have been happy in just any job, but the current amount of choices are already so overwhelming for some of us. KK proposes that technology could lead to better, less taxing ways of choosing, and in some ways I would even add that it's already doing so, through Google and internet reviews and such, but in other ways even if we could get technology to help us wade through a sea of choice, the end result may not necessarily make us happier, because as I mentioned before: people are flexible in what they accept as their passion in life. Isn't it remarkable that so many people that start playing soccer end up loving soccer, feel that it's made for them, and the same thing for those people who start out with baseball or piano or knitting or whatever. And indeed, the fact that we are so ready to accept a certain way of life, a certain job and certain hobbies as quintessentially ours sometimes even prevents us from finding our true passion. But on the other hand it gives us peace of mind, and (much!) satisfaction. Which is, of course, the entire paradox to which Schwartz refers.

* There is little or no mention in the book of path dependency and, through technology, getting stuck in a local maximum rather than pushing on to ever better ways of doing things.

* After describing the Amish, he goes on to note that there's nothing we can do to handle technology better. That seems silly, after just having seen how a certain set of values can profoundly change how people engage with technology, which can in turn really affect their happiness. His point that the Amish depend on the continual progress of technology is correct, because it's what allows them to pick-and-choose, but that doesn't imply in the least that any kind of way of living with technology, a set of values, is impossible or stupid. It doesn't imply that just swallowing it whole is always best.

* FB/IRC/MSN example: sometimes new technologies get adapted because they're so much better on one (very appealing) aspect... but we end up sacrificing other values of which it only much later becomes apparent how important they are (like real conversations). KK hints at this because he continually mentions that technology in general makes things a tiny bit better, not a lot (due to all the unforeseen problems associated with it) but he doesn't really address the fact that technology can sometimes even undo the very things it's trying to achieve —— it's not just about side-effects.