Mirko: introduction
-------------------
* Over service-based journalism: "I would sign up for that!"
	=> Curbed
	=> these are the most important decisions in people's lives,
	it's not investigative journalism but applying the journalistic
	mindset to these areas can be hugely beneficial.

We shouldn't care about whether this is journalism or whether it isn't (cf. Holovaty).

* data journalists, most of the time, are renegades, not the ones leading their respective organizations, more often, instead, cajoling them to try new things.

Jonathan Gray: although we can grasp visualizations more-or-less intuitively, we're still going to need a strong visual language, people need to get more familiar with visualizations so they can look beyond the pretty pictures and grasp the underlying issues.

Maztat: lobbypedia.de lobby register: open isn't always really open — some really messy data, sometimes intently obscured information, little cooperation from agencies, ...

Lippmannian device: the interesting part about it is not that it's high-tech or incredibly powerful, but that it's so homely: it just tries to find out how committed certain actors are to certain issues, which is something that journalists do sometime ("they say they do X, but there's hardly any news on their website about that!") and they automate what might otherwise be an hour-long browsing session into a five-minute process that's often good enough. I'd like to see more of these small workflow-enhancing tools, so that journalists do the research, but machines do the menial work. Because, at this point, journalists don't really have a strong research help kit, and may even celebrate shoe-leather research.

Simon Rogers: "Since the War Logs and the MP Expenses, there's less snickering"

---

thestory.ie : systematisch FOI-requests doen; hun blog heeft veel process-informatie. Ook een hint: meta-FOI requests, zodat je kan inkijken welke andere FOI requests goedgekeurd zijn, zodat je weet wàt men wil vrijgeven en op welke manier die requests werden geformuleerd.